# Axolotl

The axolotl ( ; from Classical Nahuatl: āxōlōtl [aːˈʃoːloːtɬ] ; Ambystoma mexicanum) is a species of mole salamander. They are neotenic, fully maturing without undergoing metamorphosis, and adults remain fully aquatic with obvious external gills. Axolotls may be difficult to distinguish from the larval stage of other neotenic adult mole salamanders, such as the tiger salamander, or other species such as mudpuppies.
Axolotls originally inhabited a system of interconnected wetlands and lakes in the highlands of Mexico. They were known to inhabit the smaller lakes of Xochimilco and Chalco and are presumed to have inhabited the larger lakes of Texcoco and Zumpango. The desiccation of these lakes, initiated by the Aztecs and accelerated during the 20th century, has led to the destruction of much of the axolotl's natural habitat, an area now largely occupied by Mexico City. With the introduction of invasive species such as tilapia and carp, wild axolotls are now near extinction. The species has been listed as critically endangered, with a decreasing population of around 50 to 1,000 adult individuals, by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and is listed under Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES).
A large captive population of axolotls currently exists, with specimens used extensively in scientific research for their remarkable ability to regenerate parts of their bodies, including limbs, gills and parts of their eyes and brains; they are also used as model organisms. As aquarium technology has developed, axolotls have become a common exhibit in zoos and public aquariums and as an occasional pet in home aquariums. Axolotls are also a popular subject in contemporary culture, inspiring a number of works and characters in the media.

## Nomenclature

The term "axolotl" is a Nahuatl word which has been translated variably as "water slave", "water servant", "water sprite", "water player", "water monstrosity", "water twin", or "water dog". The word refers to Xolotl, the Aztec God who holds dominion over fire, lightning, the dead and the resurrected, dogs, games, grotesque or ugly beings, and twins (as he is the twin of Quetzalcōātl).
Some sources prefer the term "Mexican axolotl" to refer to this species unambiguously, as "axolotl" may be used for unmetamorphosed individuals of other Ambystoma species, although the word is most commonly used to refer to wild A. mexicanum and captive individuals.

## Description

A sexually mature adult axolotl, at age 18–27 months, ranges in length from 15 to 45 cm (6 to 18 in); a size close to 23 cm (9 in) is most common and any greater than 30 cm (12 in) is rare. Axolotls possess features typical of salamander larvae, including external gills and a caudal fin extending from behind the head to the vent. Unlike most salamander species, axolotls retain their external gills when they mature into adulthood. This is a type of neoteny.
Axolotls have wide heads and lidless eyes. Their limbs are underdeveloped and possess long, thin digits. Three pairs of external gill stalks (rami) originate behind their heads and are used to move oxygenated water. These are lined with filaments (fimbriae) to increase surface area for gas exchange. Four-gill slits lined with gill rakers are hidden underneath the external gills, which prevent food from entering and allow particles to filter through. Males can be identified by their swollen cloacae lined with papillae, while females have noticeably wider bodies when gravid and full of eggs. 

Axolotls have barely visible vestigial teeth; other salamanders only develop these during metamorphosis. Their primary method of feeding is by suction, during which their rakers interlock to close their gill slits. Axolotls use their external gills for respiration; buccal pumping (gulping air from the surface) may also be used to provide oxygen to their lungs. Buccal pumping can occur in a two-stroke manner, pumping air from the mouth to the lungs, or a four-stroke manner, reversing this pathway using compression forces.

The wild type animal (the "natural" form) is brown or tan with gold speckles and an olive undertone. They also possess the ability to subtly alter their color by changing the relative size and thickness of their melanophores, presumably for camouflage. 
Axolotls have four pigmentation genes; when mutated, they create different color variants. The five most common mutant colors are listed below:

Leucistic: pale pink with black eyes.
Xanthic: grey, with black eyes.
Albinistic: pale pink or white, with red eyes.
Melanistic: all black or dark blue with no gold speckling or olive tone.
In addition, there is wide individual variability in the size, frequency, and intensity of the gold speckling, and at least one variant leads to the development of a black and white piebald appearance upon reaching maturity. Because pet breeders frequently cross the variant colors, double homozygous mutants are common in the pet trade, especially white/pink animals with pink eyes that are double homozygous mutants for both the albino and leucistic genes. 

The 32 billion base pair long sequence of the axolotl's genome was published in 2018; it was the largest animal genome completed at the time. It revealed species-specific genetic pathways that may be responsible for limb regeneration. Although the axolotl genome is about 10 times as large as the human genome, it encodes a similar number of proteins (23,251, compared to about 20,000 in the human genome). The size difference is mostly explained by a large fraction of repetitive sequences; these also contribute to increased median intron sizes (22,759 bp), which are 13, 16 and 25 times that observed in human (1,750 bp), mouse (1,469 bp) and Tibetan frog (906 bp), respectively.

### Physiology

#### Regeneration
The feature of the axolotl that attracts most attention is its healing ability: the axolotl does not heal by scarring, but is capable of tissue regeneration. Entire lost appendages such as limbs and the tail can regrow over a period of months, and in certain cases, more vital structures, such as the tissues of the eye and heart, can be regrown. They can even restore parts of their central nervous system, such as less vital parts of their brains. Moreover, they can readily accept transplants from other individuals—including eyes and parts of the brain—restoring these "alien organs" to full functionality. In special cases, axolotls have been known to repair a damaged limb while also regenerating an additional one, ending up with an extra appendage which makes them attractive to pet owners as a novelty.
There are three basic requirements for regeneration of a limb: (1) the wound epithelium, (2) nerve signaling, and (3) the presence of cells from the different limb axes. A wound epidermis is quickly formed by the cells to cover up the site of the wound. In the following days, the cells of the wound epidermis divide and grow, quickly forming a blastema, which means the wound is ready to heal and undergo patterning to form the new limb. It is believed that during limb generation, axolotls have a different system to regulate their internal macrophage level and suppress inflammation, as scarring prevents proper healing and regeneration. However, this belief has been questioned by other studies. 
The apical-ectodermal ridge (AER), a fundamental growth structure with the apical-ectodermal cap (AEC), is one of the few things given credit for the axolotl's ability to regenerate whole limbs in early development. The apical ectodermal ridge is a structure in embryos that starts the growth of appendages by signaling how they are shaped and extended. These cells are needed to form limbs in most tetrapods, amphibians, and humans. Unlike most other animals, the AEC in the axolotl is able to send signals through growth hormones to activate blastema cells, which can rebuild whole amputated or damaged limbs or organs.
Axolotls also experience indeterminate growth, meaning their bodies continue to grow throughout their life; some consider this trait to be a direct contributor to their regenerative abilities. Their ability to regenerate declines with age but does not disappear, though in metamorphosed individuals, the ability to regenerate is greatly diminished.

#### Neoteny

Most amphibians begin their lives as aquatic animals unable to live on dry land, often called tadpoles. To reach adulthood, they go through a process called metamorphosis, in which they lose their gills and start living on land. The axolotl is unusual in that it has a lack of thyroid-stimulating hormone, which is needed for the thyroid to produce thyroxine for the axolotl to go through metamorphosis; it keeps its gills and lives in water all its life, even after it becomes an adult and is able to reproduce. This trait—reaching sexual maturity without undergoing metamorphosis—is called neoteny.
The genes responsible for neoteny in laboratory axolotls may have been identified; they are not linked to the genes of wild populations, suggesting artificial selection is the cause of complete neoteny in laboratory and pet axolotls. The genes responsible have been narrowed down to a small chromosomal region called met1, which contains several candidate genes.
Many other species within the axolotl's genus are also either entirely neotenic or have neotenic populations. Sirens, Necturus mudpuppies, and the troglobitic olm are other examples of neotenic salamanders, although unlike axolotls, they cannot be induced to metamorphose by an injection of iodine or thyroxine hormone.

#### Metamorphosis
The axolotl has, over evolutionary time, lost the ability to naturally undergo metamorphosis. It still retains the capacity to undergo metamorphosis if provided with the necessary hormones, through artificial administration. Under modern laboratory conditions, metamorphosis is reliably induced by administering thyroid hormones, including thyroxine, triiodo-L-thyronine, or thyroid-stimulating hormones. 
Depending on what hormone is used for induction, different outcomes may occur. Some hormones, such as triiodo-l-thyronine, can promote regenerative abilities while in some cases failing to produce complete metamorphosis. In contrast, thyroxine can inhibit regenerative abilities and accelerate metamorphosis.   

After an axolotl undergoes hormonally induced metamorphosis and begins living on land, it experiences a number of physiological changes that help it adapt to terrestrial life. These include increased muscle tone in limbs, resorption of gills and fins into the body, the development of eyelids, and a reduction in the skin's permeability to water, allowing the axolotl to remain more effectively hydrated on land. The lungs of an axolotl, though present alongside gills after reaching non-metamorphosed adulthood, develop further during metamorphosis. Axolotls that complete metamorphosis resemble adult plateau tiger salamander, though axolotls have longer toes.
In the absence of induced metamorphosis, larval axolotls begin absorbing iodide into their thyroid glands at around 30 days post-fertilization. Larval axolotls do produce thyroid hormones from iodide, but the amount appears highly variable. In contrast, adult axolotls do not produce detectable levels of thyroid hormone unless metamorphosis is triggered.

## Wild population

Axolotls are within the same genus as the tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum), being part of its species complex along with all other Mexican species of Ambystoma. Within Ambystomatidae, the closest relative of the axototl is the Eastern tiger salamander. Their habitat is like that of most neotenic Ambystoma species: a high-altitude body of water surrounded by a risky terrestrial environment, with these conditions thought to favor the development of neoteny. However, a population of terrestrial Mexican tiger salamanders occupies and breeds in the axolotl's habitat (being sympatric). The axolotl is native to the freshwater Lakes Xochimilco and Chalco in the Valley of Mexico (though the species may have also inhabited the larger Lakes of Texcoco and Zumpango). Lake Chalco is an unstable ecosystem, often being drained as a flood control measure, and Lake Xochimilco is a remnant of its former self, existing mainly as canals. The water temperature in Xochimilco rarely rises above 20 °C (68 °F), and may fall to 6–7 °C (43–45 °F) or lower in the winter. An additional population of Ambystoma inhabiting the artificial lake at Chapultepec was confirmed to contain axolotls; the extent of occurrence as of 23 October 2019 was 467 square kilometres (180 sq mi). Overall, the wild axolotl prefers a system of water channels and deep-water lakes with abundant aquatic vegetation.

### Biology

The axolotl is carnivorous, consuming small prey such as mollusks, worms, insects, other arthropods, and small fish in the wild. Axolotls locate food by smell, and will "snap" at any potential meal, sucking the food into their stomachs with vacuum force. The wild axolotl is thought to reach sexual maturity at 1.5 years of age, with a generation length of around 5.5 years. The development of neoteny in mole salamanders is thought to have been an adaptation to conditions that did not favor metamorphosis into the terrestrial form.

### Threats
Axolotls are only native to the Mexican Central Valley. Although the population once extended through most lakes and wetlands in this region, its habitat is now limited to Lake Xochimilco as a result of the expansion of Mexico City, and is under pressure from the city's growth. The axolotl is on the International Union for Conservation of Nature's Red List of threatened species.
Surveys in 1998, 2003, and 2008 found 6,000, 1,000, and 100 axolotls, respectively, per square kilometer in Lake Xochimilco. A four-month-long search in 2013 found no surviving individuals in the wild, but one month later two were spotted in a network of canals leading from Xochimilco.
Lake Xochimilco has poor water quality; tests reveal a low nitrogen-phosphorus ratio and a high concentration of chlorophyll a, which are indicative of an oxygen-poor environment not well-suited to axolotls. This has been caused by the demands of industries such as aquaculture and agriculture in the region, which maintain the water levels of the lake through inputs of partially treated wastewater. Intensively used agricultural pesticides eventually enter the lake through runoff; these pesticides contain chemical compounds that sharply increase mortality in axolotl embryos and larvae. Of the surviving embryos and larvae, there is also an increase in morphological, behavioral, and activity abnormalities.
With such a dramatic reduction in native population, there has been a large loss of genetic diversity. This can be dangerous for the remaining population, causing an increase in inbreeding and a decrease in fitness and adaptive potential. Studies found indicators of low interpopulation gene flow and higher rates of genetic drift. These are likely the result of multiple "bottleneck" incidents, wherein the number of individuals in the population and its genetic diversity are sharply reduced. The offspring produced after bottleneck events have a greater risk of decreased fitness and are often less capable of adaptation. Several bottleneck events may even lead to extinction. Studies have also found high rates of relatedness indicative of inbreeding, which can cause an increase in the presence of deleterious, or harmful, mutations in genes. The detection of introgressed tiger salamander (A. tigrinum) DNA in the laboratory axolotl population raises concerns about the suitability of the captive population as an "ark" for potential reintroduction purposes.
Another factor that threatens the population is the introduction of invasive fish species such as Nile tilapia and the common carp. These fish eat the axolotls' young and compete for their primary source of food. The presence of these species has changed the behavior of axolotls, causing them to be less active in the effort to avoid predation. This reduction in activity greatly impacts the axolotl's foraging and mating opportunities.
The fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis has been detected in axolotls; B. dendrobatidis is a fungus that causes chytridiomycosis in amphibians, and is a major concern for amphibian conservation worldwide. However, the axolotl displays resistance to both B. dendrobatidis and B. salamandrivorans, so chytridiomycosis is thought to not be a threat to this species.

### Conservation efforts
There has been little improvement in the conditions of the population of native axolotls over the years. Many scientists are focusing their conservation efforts on the translocation of captive-bred individuals into new habitats or reintroduction into Lake Xochimilco. Studies have shown that captive-bred axolotls that are raised in a semi-natural environment can catch prey, survive in the wild, and have moderate success in escaping predators. These captive-bred individuals can be introduced into unpolluted bodies of water or back into Lake Xochimilco; however, with the current state of pollution, urbanization, and predators within Lake Xochimilco, the captive-bred individuals may eventually have the same fate as the wild population.
The Laboratorio de Restauracion Ecologica (transl. Laboratory of Ecological Restoration), of the National Autonomous University of Mexico, has built up a population of 100 captive-bred individuals as of 2021. These axolotls are mostly used for research, but there are plans to establish a viable population of axolotls within a semi-artificial wetland inside the university.
A 2025 study confirmed the viability of releasing captive-bred axolotls into the wild, with recaptured animals putting on weight since their release. However, this practice risks the loss of the axolotls through predation, as several released axolotls were preyed upon by great egrets.

## Relation to humans

### Research history
Alexander von Humboldt noted that the Mexicans, having been vanquished by the Spanish Empire, lived "in great want, compelled to feed on roots of aquatic plants, insects and a problematical reptile called axolotl".
Six adult axolotls (including a leucistic specimen) were shipped from Mexico City to the Jardin des Plantes in Paris in 1863. Unaware of their neoteny, Auguste Duméril was surprised when, instead of the axolotl, he found in the vivarium a new species, similar to the salamander. This discovery was the starting point of research about neoteny. It is not certain that Ambystoma velasci specimens were not included in the original shipment. Vilem Laufberger in Prague used thyroid hormone injections to induce an axolotl to grow into a terrestrial adult salamander. The experiment was repeated by Englishman Julian Huxley, who was unaware the experiment had already been done, using ground thyroids. Since then, experiments have often been done with injections of iodine or various thyroid hormones used to induce metamorphosis.

### Use as a model organism

Today, the axolotl is still used in research as a model organism, and large numbers are bred in captivity. They are especially easy to breed compared to other salamanders in their family, which are rarely captive-bred due to the husbandry demands of terrestrial life. One attractive feature for research is the large and easily manipulated embryo, which allows viewing of the full development of a vertebrate. Axolotls are used in heart defect studies due to the presence of a mutant gene that causes heart failure in embryos. Since the embryos survive almost to hatching with no heart function, the defect is very observable. Further research has been conducted to examine their heart as a model of a single human ventricle and excessive trabeculation. The axolotl is also considered an ideal animal model for the study of neural tube closure due to the similarities between human and axolotl neural plate and tube formation; the axolotl's neural tube, unlike a frog's, is not hidden under a layer of superficial epithelium. There are also mutations affecting other organ systems, some of which are not yet well characterized.  
The regenerative abilities of the axolotl have led to its use as a model for the development of limbs in vertebrates, with the goal of understand how humans can achieve better ways to heal from serious injuries. They also leave the species as the perfect model to study the process of stem cells and neoteny. Current research can record specific examples of these regenerative properties through tracking cell fates and behaviors, lineage tracing skin triploid cell grafts, pigmentation imaging, electroporation, tissue clearing and lineage tracing from dye labeling. The newer technologies of germline modification and transgenesis are better suited for live imaging the regenerative processes that occur for axolotls. 
In a 2025 study, scientists found a new way to insert and activate the genes inside the axolotl's brain and nervous system using special, harmless viruses called Adeno-Associated Viruses (AAVs). Before this, it was hard for researchers to make specific genes work inside the axolotl, but this discovery allows them to explore how the axolotl's nervous system helps it regrow body parts like its brain and spinal cord. Additionally, they found that the axolotl's nervous system has a unique two-way communication between the brain and eye.
The genetics of the color variants of the axolotl have also been widely studied.

### Captive care

The axolotl is a popular exotic pet like its relative, the tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum). As for all poikilothermic organisms, lower temperatures result in slower metabolism and a potentially dangerously reduced appetite. Temperatures at approximately 16 °C (61 °F) to 18 °C (64 °F) are suggested for captive axolotls to ensure sufficient food intake; stress resulting from more than a day's exposure to lower temperatures may quickly lead to disease and death, and temperatures higher than 24 °C (75 °F) may lead to metabolic rate increase, also causing stress and eventually death. Chlorine, commonly added to tapwater, is harmful to axolotls. A single axolotl typically requires a 150-litre (40-US-gallon) tank. Axolotls spend the majority of the time at the bottom of their tanks.
In captivity, axolotls eat a variety of readily available foods, including trout and salmon pellets, frozen or live bloodworms, earthworms, and waxworms. Axolotls can also eat feeder fish, but care should be taken as fish may contain parasites.
Substrates are another important consideration for captive axolotls, as axolotls (like other amphibians and reptiles) tend to ingest bedding material together with food and are commonly prone to gastrointestinal obstruction and foreign body ingestion. Some common substrates used for animal enclosures can be harmful for amphibians and reptiles. Gravel (common in aquarium use) should not be used, and is recommended that any sand consists of smooth particles with a grain size of under 1mm. One guide to axolotl care for laboratories notes that bowel obstructions are a common cause of death, and recommends that no items with a diameter below 3 cm (or approximately the size of the animal's head) should be available to the animal.
There is some evidence that axolotls might seek out appropriately-sized gravel for use as gastroliths based on experiments conducted at the University of Manitoba axolotl colony. As there is no conclusive evidence pointing to gastrolith use, gravel should be avoided due to the high risk of impaction.
Salts, such as Holtfreter's solution, are often added to the water to prevent infection. Among hobbyists, the process of artificially inducing metamorphosis can often result in death during or even following a successful attempt, and so casual hobbyists are generally discouraged from attempting to induce metamorphosis in pet axolotls. Morphed pet axolotls should be given solid footholds in their enclosure to satisfy their need for land. They should not be given live animals as food.

### Cultural significance

The species is named after the Aztec deity Xolotl, the god of fire and lightning, who transformed himself into an axolotl to avoid being sacrificed by fellow gods. They continue to play an outsized cultural role in Mexico. For example, axolotls appear in the works of Mexican muralist Diego Rivera. In 2021, Mexico released a new design for its 50-peso banknote featuring an axolotl, along with maize and chinampas, on its back. It was recognized as "Bank Note of the Year" by the International Bank Note Society. 

In Japan, the creatures are commonly known as "wooper loopers" (ウーパールーパー) following a 1980s marketing campaign by Nissin Foods featuring an axolotl with that name. In 1999, Pokémon Gold and Silver, made by Japanese developer Game Freak, introduced the Pokémon Wooper, which is directly based on an axolotl. Additionally, in 2002, Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire introduced the Pokémon Mudkip and its evolutions, which take some visual inspiration from axolotls. 
Starting in the late 20th and early 21st century, axolotls became renowned as a cultural icon, with the species' likeness appearing in or inspiring various aspects of contemporary media, such as television shows, movies, or video games. Following Mojang Studios' trend of adding endangered species to the game to raise awareness, axolotls were added to the video game Minecraft in 2020 (depicted as troglofauna in-game), and were included in its spin-offs Minecraft: Dungeons and Lego Minecraft. The dragon Toothless in the How to Train Your Dragon movies was modeled after axolotls as well. 
Julio Cortázar wrote a book titled "Axolotl".
HD 224693, a star in the equatorial constellation of Cetus, was named Axólotl in 2019.
